rule two is imagine who you could be and
then aim single-mindedly at that
this paragraph is taken from a chapter
sub-section entitled who are you and who
could you be
an unforgettable story captures the
essence of humanity and distills
communicates and clarifies it bringing
what we are and what we should be into
focus
it speaks to us motivating the attention
that inspires imitation
we learn to see and act in the manner of
the heroes of the stories that captivate
us these stories call to capacities that
lie deep within our nature but might
still never develop without that call
we are dormant adventurers lovers
leaders artists and rebels but need to
discover that we are all those things by
seeing the reflection of such patterns
in dramatic and literary form
that is part of being a creature that is
part nature and part culture
an unforgettable story advances our
capacity to understand our behavior
beyond habit and expectation toward an
imaginative and then verbalized
understanding
such a story presents us in the most
compelling manner with the ultimate
adventure the divine romance and the
eternal battle between good and evil
all this helps us clarify our
understanding of moral and immoral
attitude personal and social
this can be seen everywhere
and always
question
who are you or at least who could you be
answer
part of the eternal force that
constantly confronts the terrible
unknown
voluntarily part of the eternal force
that transcends naivety and becomes
dangerous enough in a controlled manner
to understand evil and bearded in its
lair
and part of the eternal force that faces
chaos and turns it into productive order
or the takes order that has become too
restrictive reduces it to chaos and
renders it productive once again
and all of this being very difficult to
understand consciously but vital to our
survival is transmitted in the form of
the stories that we cannot help but
attend to
and it is in this manner that we come to
apprehend what is of value what we
should aim at
and what we could be
so chapter 2 is
imagine who you could be and then aim
single-mindedly at that and and for me
after being on tour with you
um
i think that's something that that got
into me through osmosis that i would be
on stage and even though everyone was
there for you i thought
hey i'm part of this somehow this this
thing somehow i became part of this and
then once i realized
that when the pa announcer said my name
that those people knew me i thought that
i'm me i'm the guy they're talking about
like i'm doing something and then it
that just that it helped my aim it
helped my aim
and
i wonder how many people just don't they
don't know how to aim because they have
no experience like that something like
that well that's that's part of what
tradition is supposed to teach you by
presenting you with examples of great
people of the past
the lesson is not supposed to be exactly
bow down and worship these people
be like them
and you could be
and i mean that's really the goal of the
humanities when it's the humanities if
it's not if that's the goal then
students will study the humanities as
soon as that ceases to be the goal
then it it there's there's nothing of
value there i mean great literature
tells you
it tells you the great story of good and
evil always it's good and evil against
the background of chaos and order always
and the evil characters are there to to
to be bad examples and the good
characters are there to be good examples
or you see the interplay of those forces
within a single person
and and
and it's a reminder of of who you could
be and you you can find out who you
should be it's actually
this and this is something quite
mysterious i believe and and part of the
proof let's say that we exist in a world
of value
your conscience tells you who you should
be
now that doesn't mean that necessarily
that it's infallible but people wrestle
with their conscience you know there
isn't anyone i've never met anyone who
is
you know
i'm not i'm
narcissists accepted let's say
people are generally tormented by their
conscience and the reason for that
is that
they're not
they're deviating from the path that is
their destiny i mean if you don't think
that well then what do you think what do
you think that conscience is i mean i've
asked my classes repeatedly do you have
a little voice in your head that tells
you when you've done something wrong or
you're about to or a feeling and they
all
they all immediately agree with that no
one finds that a foreign concept and so
if you don't know who you are your
conscience will remind you when you're
no sorry if you don't know who you could
be your consonants will remind you when
you deviate and then you can start to
attend to that
think well look i'm actually ashamed
when i do
this
i should stop unless i want to be
ashamed all the time it looks like i
should stop and then maybe you stop
doing that and and then your conscience
objects to something else and maybe you
stop doing that and as that happens you
start to develop a vision of who you
could be
and the chapter
indicates it
it it uh
it looks at symbolic representations
it's an examination of a certain
symbolic representation of the ideal and
so it's my attempt to
um assess tradition for what it can tell
us about what the ideal human being
might be like and the ideal human being
is
the person who forthrightly
upholds the traditions of the culture
and forges away into the unknown we went
through that and
um
and
pulls new information in and builds
rebuilds himself and the world
and
that's who you could be and now the the
the difficulty comes in figuring out how
to do that within the confines of your
own life so in some sense that's how to
bring the divine to earth there's this
divine pattern
but it's
it's general
see this is one of the mysterious things
about christianity that's so remarkable
about it is that there's there's a
there's the
the
the christ that's eternal the word of
god say so that's it's a representation
of something
absolutely transcendent but it's married
to the particulars of one particular
time and space and
obviously um critics of christianity
regard that as one of
its major flaws you know that there's
this idea of god who is a carpenter in
some out of the way place
in some out of the way time
but
you're someone in an out of the way
place at a particular time and place and
for for you
what that means is that
for you to
make contact with the highest of values
you have to bring that down to your
particulars
and figure out how you do that it's
going to be a way that no one else does
it because you're the only one that's
you
and but you can you can aim at something
aim at something and the the point of
the chapter is that you aim at something
and that will shape you as you move
towards it and then your aim will change
you'll move but that doesn't matter
it gets you going
and you'll be molded across time more
and more into the person you could be
can you talk about that just from a
personal perspective as someone that
i've seen do it i mean i i that's what i
saw you do every night you would take
your your intellectual
um curiosity to the end of where it
would go sometimes you would get off
stage and say to me oh you know i i took
that as far as i could tonight and then
the next night you would go a little bit
further with it or a little bit further
and i knew there were moments because we
did so many shows i knew when you were a
little past where you would want to go
and then i could see you come back but
can you talk about what that was like
for you in terms of your life how you
felt how time felt how the relationship
with the audience felt when you're when
you're doing it right because i feel
like people don't know that when you're
doing it right what does it feel like
well to begin with
and this happened when i was in graduate
school i had a lot of bad habits i
smoked like a pack of cigarettes a day
and i drank a lot i came from this
little town in northern alberta and like
many little towns especially in northern
canada
that alcohol overuse is de-rigger you
know it's it's and so
um
i noticed when i was
in my early 20s that
the only time i really
regretted what i had done
was when i was drinking
now it was also interfering with me
writing
because i couldn't concentrate well
enough if i was hungover but i also
couldn't really constant i couldn't
i couldn't tolerate the emotional strain
of what i was writing about when i was
hungover it was too i couldn't handle
being on the edge because i destabilized
my nervous system
in any case i stopped drinking and the
reason for that was well i decided i
didn't want to be ashamed of what i was
doing anymore it seemed i thought well
maybe i could not do things that were
shameful and then see what my life was
like so that that was sort of on the
negative end the constraint end
i think people get on the more positive
end people get deeply involved in what
they're doing if they're in the right
place in the right time so that you i
would say you can tell this is the idea
of heaven on earth to some degree
when time stops when you're not aware of
the duration of time when you're so
engaged with what you're doing that
you're not aware of the duration of time
then
then you've got the forces of chaos
balance and order balanced properly
it's you're not stultified and bored
that's an excess of order
everything's too predictable you're not
overwhelmed
you're you're dealing with it's like
it's like it's you're playing tennis at
the peak of your game that's partly what
people experience when they're great
athletes when they play the zone yeah
and they're always stretching themselves
to their limit you can tell that if you
watch a gymnast for example who has a
brilliant performance they've stretched
themselves beyond their domain of
competence during the performance
and that's what makes everybody leap to
their feet
that's that's the incarnation given
embodiment right there in front of you
for some moments and everyone cheers
that on
do you think it's weird how it becomes a
fleeting moment in a way like know i
know
i know what you're saying is true when
i'm when i'm doing what i'm supposed to
be doing and i'm on my game and and my
thoughts are are right and straight time
just moves and then i go whoa a month
passed a month passed and i was good
that whole time and i i did write that
whole time and i was happier and my
relationship with david or whoever else
is is better in that time but that that
it becomes fleeting in that suddenly you
could have a great month and then
suddenly something happens
chaos returns like it's it's that we
almost forget that moment you can't like
you can't hold it
well it requires a lot of it requires
even to some degree some good fortune to
maintain i certainly haven't been able
to do that while i was ill
you know and time
one of the consequences of of my illness
whatever it was or is was time dilation
like days lasted weeks it seemed like
minutes lasted hours and i mean that
literally
that was terrible the weight of time
it's the weight of brute mortality
it's the weight of self-consciousness
and you escape that immersed properly
so
and that that second chapter is a pretty
practical chapter it's like well if
you're not
who you want to be then think about how
you could be better
take a chance aim at that work at it and
see what happens
so
so that's and that's a disciplinary
routine i would say yeah and it takes
you out of your current order one of the
sections of your book that i really
loved it was chapter two where you get
into alchemy and you get into you know a
discussion of
uh it was one of the richest chapters
for me helen lewis said i sounded like a
stoned undergraduate
uh well i must like stonehenge
because this is she she wrote this
review in the atlantic um
and i was talking about sorry i'll let
you get back to this right away but sure
he was talking about i commented on this
uh the snitch in harry potter because i
found that it's a very old symbol that's
a really old symbol it shocked me to
death that she used it i couldn't
believe she used it because it's really
obscure this symbol and so i talk about
it in the book
and you know which that's what she
dismissed as the ravings of a of a you
know stoned undergraduate but then i
thought well
look
rowling is richer than the queen
she came from nothing
she produced this empire it's an
absolute empire books that's of that
were 600 pages long that she could read
to children in stadiums
a whole string of movies that dominated
the entertainment landscape for like six
years it was a
it was a cultural a global cultural
phenomenon
it's like well don't you think that's
worth looking into that's what makes you
a stoned undergraduate it's
or are you so clueless that you can't
see that when something like that
happens there's a mystery it's why in
the world would the story of a magical
orphan become a multi-billion dollar
decades-long global cultural phenomenon
well
if you're interested in culture if
you're interested in anything besides
narrow politics you'd think that that
would be a
you think that would be worthy of
investigation
it's not easy to see these things
sometimes for the mystery that they are
no doubt so and i think it's what you
say about stories stories can be true
stories the story of harry potter and
the snitch is a true story because it's
in resonance with a real idea something
that's in the collective consciousness
something that's in our primordial
psyche in a way and so when we hear it
otherwise we're trying to be collective
exactly we wouldn't we wouldn't all
enjoy it and look we can go to those
movies we suspend disbelief willingly
instantly and we get immersed in the
story that's magic that's magic what's
going on it's worthy of investigation so
anyways i
i sort of sidetracked that well that's
actually exactly where i was going so
i'm gonna read i'm gonna read this
section and you're talking about the
snitch as the uh alchemical symbol of
the round chaos
and you say this the seeker is the
person who is playing the game that
everyone else is playing and who is a
disciplined expert at that game but who
is also playing an additional higher
order game the pursuit of what is of
primary significance the snitch like the
round chaos can therefore be considered
the container of that primary
significance so for those of us who
don't know the harry potter movie
there's a game called quidditch and it's
basically like lacrosse and you try to
get the ball in the goal but there's a
seeker who actually is seeking this
magical golden orb which has alchemical
kind of roots and in the round chaos and
if they seek that the game is over and
it's been given that you know additional
as you say primary significance and this
concept was really really interesting to
me to have it unpack because i didn't i
watched some harry potter and i saw it
and i saw the game that of course didn't
occur to me it was just like oh this is
the rules to this game but then i
realized in my own life there's the game
that i'm playing oh i'm running on it
and i'm doing these things but what is
my snitch what is my round chaos what is
that ultimate higher order potential
that i'm seeking and so my question was
have you thought about for you because
we can obviously see
the game being played as far as the
normal quidditch game but for you
personally what is your what is your
snitch what is your round chaos that
you're seeking the game within the game
that you're playing at large well what's
always attracted my attention
predominantly so so let me unpack some
things here
um
some some of the interpretation of that
symbol a lot of it came from my reading
of jung because he's the only person
that i've ever read who
seems to know about such things
even knows that they exist
jung believed that
you your interest which is a relatively
involuntary phenomenon right you get
interested in things but
but you can't make yourself interested
in something
the interest grabs you and
and
grasps your attention
and so
jung thought of that as a deeply seated
biological mechanism which it obviously
is it's a neurological mechanism of some
sort that governs
it possesses it it has the capacity to
possess your voluntary attention just
like hunger does when you get hungry
you're typing away writing a book or
something and you get hungry hunger
starts to grab your attention well look
you're interested in some things and
you're not interested in others well why
well
some of that has to do with your choice
but but not that much a lot of it has to
do with who you are in the deepest sense
and jung believed that
you were likely to become interested in
things that furthered your development
furthered your psychological development
made you more and more competent so for
example you might get interested you
might really come to admire someone and
so what they do grabs your interest and
that happens with children quite a lot
and they get interested in kids who are
slightly ahead of them in the
developmental curve and then they mimic
them and so your the interest is
something that grabs you to move you
forward on the developmental curve
and so it's it's the it's the
manifestation of your potential higher
self in the present
and jung described that as the self the
self was in his view the totality of
your being it's not definable it
includes you in the future and you are
you are in some sense something that's
coming to be into the future uh
hopefully to be more than you are
although you know not always because we
also degenerate in any case your
interest
pulls you along on a particular
developmental pathway
i've always been
gripped in some sense by things that are
very very dark
and
most of what's
by pathology of one sort or another
which is of course partly why i'm a
clinical psychologist you know but i
wanted to remediate it i wanted to help
but
but it was it was the compulsion to
investigate the darkest of darkness and
whether that's been good for me or not
well that's that's a that's a different
question i suppose it has been extremely
good in some ways and it's been it's
been complicated we could certainly say
that but
but then
more i i wanted to figure out what what
what would protect us from from that
darkness
and i guess it was because i was so
shocked
existentially shocked
when i first encountered
writings that pertain to the holocaust
and to other genocidal acts of that sort
and i was always interested in that for
some reason from a
psychological perspective it's like what
compelled people to do that and how can
we not do it again and that
so so anyways anything that that focused
on that grabbed my interest that's why i
read jung
extensively and nietzsche and dostoevsky
and solzhenitsyn those are the people i
ran across others as well that who
seemed to have some answers as far as i
could tell and
um
so that's what it's been for me
yeah yeah i don't and i don't know why
it might be my proclivity towards
depression i really have no i you know
i'm a creative person by temperament
and i also have this depressive
illness maybe it's the consequence of
those two i don't know who knows right
who knows what what what pulls you
forward the ancients the ancients would
typically externalize these forces you
know when they couldn't understand and
you talk about that with the god mercury
the god mercury was the one that drew
you to these different things but yes
he's got wings and he splitters and it's
that's what your attention does it pulls
it's like an op that pixar movie every
time there's a squirrel the dog
that's their snitch they that's the rip
of instinctual forces it's very comical
but
and see in human beings i think it's
unbelievably sophisticated because
i do believe that we're compelled to
follow a line that leads to our further
development and i do think that that
involves mimicry of the hero for example
the hero
psychologically speaking is
that figure which represents
a potential stage of development for you
and you'll find your hero because you'll
admire something or someone
and why is that well something's well
i gave you the best explanation for that
that i can that's that's the future you
in some sense manifesting itself in the
present saying here's where you could go
yeah and that's the instinct for growth
another aspect that they externalized
was the idea of the daemon which is
almost like the uh the mercurial impulse
that's taken and stretched out for a
long time it's something that's
continually drawing you toward some
potential realization of what you're
capable of and they put that again in
this kind of demi-god landscape but of
course that was just their way of
understanding things although it also
makes a tremendous amount of sense like
sure to make to make
um rage a god like mars
well yes why well it's immortal
i mean rage will be here long after
you're gone
you're definitely it's pawn at times
you know it's not obvious who's in
control when you're enraged
yeah in fact at at some levels of rage
that can even be a legal defense
because we recognize that you can be out
of your head your normal personality
isn't in control
and really powerful motivational forces
have that
transcendent
reality it's not a and rage is older
than human beings
it's really really old
and it it can have you in its grip
sexual impulses the same way hunger all
of these things are are unbelievably
powerful forces and
they don't just operate on the
primordial level as far as i'm concerned
there there are sophisticated gods of
motivation
and
we we are
um possessed by them when we do such
things as go to movies
we don't notice what the hell are we
doing watching this movie
why are we entertained by it why does it
grip our interest
we don't know we don't even question it
it's like well it's entertaining it's
fun it's interesting if it's interesting
you don't have to justify it then you
think right well that's so that's
interesting in and of itself if it's
interesting you don't justify it and
then someone can tap you on the head and
say look what you're doing and you think
oh yeah that's kind of odd that i'm
doing that what the hell am i doing
standing in line for three days to see
star wars when i'm an atheistic engineer
what's going on here oh look at that
it's a it's a religious impulse
yeah and and i don't have a religion and
so this is filling the gap and that's
why i go to star wars conventions and
and it i'm possessed by something that i
haven't
pursued
one of the things that you wrote was
really powerful for me to read because
to me i think it described my snitch my
round chaos that thing that i'm seeking
underneath the games that i'm playing
and so i'm going to read this little
snippet here
who could you be
you could be all that a man or woman
might be you could be the newest avatar
in your own unique manner of the great
ancestral heroes of the past
what is the upper limit to that we do
not know our religious structures hint
at it how would someone who determined
to take full responsibility for the
tragedy and malevolence of the world
manifest itself
the ultimate question of man is not who
we are but who we could be
that's it for me i mean for me i read
that i was like yep that's it there's
the snitch with its wings and it's
golden you know mercurius allure that
i'm that i've i'm really chasing
underneath all of this and i enjoy all
these other things but who could you be
exactly you see that in children i
watched little children play and
what what they're doing you know they're
they're they're they're attempting to
grow forward but they toy with
with identities
i'm
my little granddaughter i wrote about
her in this book too
it's so funny watching her
she had pocahontas the disney movie and
she had a pocahontas doll and she
watched that movie a number of times and
then for well it's been a year now she's
only three and a half for a whole year
she has two names scarlett and ellie um
and
uh one's her middle name but but she's
called one or the other and and it seems
to be perfectly comfortable with both
um
if you ask her if she's ellie she'll say
yes
and if you ask her if she's scarlet
she'll say yes but if you ask her if
she's pocahontas she'll also say yes and
then if you ask her if she is scarlett
ellie or pocahontas she'll say she's
pocahontas and she's been she's been
insisting on that for a whole year
and so she's playing
out this role i don't know how much of
her imagination is devoted to it but
enough for this trip like that's if
you're how old are you 40 40 just turned
40. yeah okay so you know imagine that
you had a fictional identity for 15
years that's approximately the same
relative length of time
and
the kids you know they they weave up a
fantasy world and then they l play out
an identity in that and then they weave
out another fantasy world and they play
out an identity with that and they shape
that identity by their interactions with
other children and adults and hopefully
they find an identity that suits them
that other people also accept
because your identity has to be
something that other people accept or it
isn't going to work for you
but that's all part of this exploration
of who they could be
you know it's the play is in fact the
the
the exercising of that realm of
possibilities and so a good father a
good parent for that matter but i think
this i think at least is an archetypally
paternal role puts a border of security
around the child you know and the mother
might be inside that border of security
when she has young children and play can
take place there and the play is the
investigation of multiple
identities with the hope of finding one
that
is functional that is also socially
desired
because those things can't be
dissociated one of the reasons i think
that the identity politics has bothered
me so much speaking of snitches you know
it's bothered me it's like this bothers
me and i've only recently realized that
some of it had to do with what i saw as
limitations on free speech which is i
have to say the words that you know some
authority or some population
demands that i say which i don't like
um
but there's something else too which is
that it's based on a very misleading
theory of identity
your identity is not just
who how you feel about yourself at this
moment and you can't impose that on
other people because they don't know how
to deal with that
like even if they wanted to they
wouldn't know the rules of the game you
have to negotiate your identity with
other people and so then you have to
think of identity as something that's
negotiated with other people
and so if you if you have an implicit
theory of identity like the one that
seems to be increasingly dominating the
cultural landscape which is identity is
something that's only subjectively
determined and can also change from
moment to moment
then you're misleading
people as they develop because they come
up with a very unsophisticated notion of
what identity is
and that's not good because it that's a
that's core
and like but part of your identity is
your value to other people that's a huge
part of it
and that's not subjective that's other
people make that decision
yeah so and you talk about that and i
think it's chapter three where you say
that's one of the ways we keep our
sanity is talking to other people and
the interaction
with our community and and all of these
other things that isolate us more and
more to a to a single subjective
perspective is going to lead to a
certain madness it is definitely well
exactly well i tried to impress upon
some of the trans activists that were
after me when i first made some public
statements i said look i don't think i
didn't say it this eloquently
unfortunately
what i what i what i would have liked to
have said now at least was it isn't
obvious to me at all that your theory of
identity is going to serve the function
that you assume it is
it's not psychologically sophisticated
enough it's not sociologically
sophisticated enough you can't insist
that other people play a game
that they don't know how to play
especially when you also don't know how
to play it except to say that it exists
so
and this sanity issue is you know a lot
of us is externalized because we're such
social creatures
and everyone has weaknesses you know
you're gonna d degenerate along your
weakest
axis
and if you're fortu and you won't be
able to control yourself because some of
your weakness will be precisely that
inability to control yourself on that
axis like maybe maybe you have a
biological predisposition to alcoholism
and you know you have three shots of
vodka in 20 minutes and you're like on
top of the world you know um there are
people like that they often have
extensive family histories of alcoholism
it's a biological
uh phenomena
you can tell if you're like that if it's
really difficult for you to stop
drinking once you start it's a real
warning sign it means alcohol is a great
drug for you subjectively speaking but
you know hopefully
when you drink too much
other people are going to start telling
you it's like no you're
and that's actually how you start
diagnosing alcohol abuse are you getting
in trouble with the law
is it interfering with your intimate
relationships is it interfering with
your ability to hold a job
it means that the the addictive
substance is starting to dominate your
life in a manner that's
counterproductive and other people are
there to ensure that you stay
balanced enough so that you don't
deteriorate entirely
you're lucky if you have that and the
part of the point i make in that chapter
and i would say in both books and in
maps of meaning as well is that the
primary obligation of a
parent
is to serve as a proxy for the social
and the natural world
but let's say the social world why
well because you want to train your
child to be not only acceptable socially
but highly desirable socially and the
reason for that is that by the time
they're about three three to four is the
transition period
they're going to be spending more time
being socialized by their peers than by
you and that will increasingly be the
case as they develop and if you haven't
made them
if you haven't encouraged them
through judicious attention
to be socially desirable they're going
to be rejected by their peers and then
they fall farther and farther behind on
the developmental trajectory
jordan you asked the times person
uh in the full-length article or a
full-length recording which i listened
to you said hey don't focus on my
illness in this focus on why
people resonate with my message which
she of course did not
uh but that leads no one does oh it
leaves me an opening i'm gonna take it
right now
it's so interesting to see that is that
it's so interesting because
you know the only time that ever gets
addressed
is by the mainstream media jesus you
know horrible cliche but
it's usually
sort of brushed off and it's usually
well he seems to be attractive towards
young men who are troubled
well first of all that's not so bad is
it i mean
hypothetically
the most ardent feminist is primarily
concerned with helping
the troubled young man not be so
troubled
but it's brushed off in a cynical sort
of way and it the cynicism is also
disbelief that that could possibly be
serious
a serious enterprise well i think it's a
serious enterprise
why do you think they resonate with you
i think it's because
who knows the final answer to anything
you know but i took what i learned about
what happened in the second world war
seriously
it's like wow
we can be really bad
we should do something about that
like that was unacceptable
well was it or not well how unacceptable
was it change your life unacceptable
better be
if you want it not to happen again
and it's not like it the next time it
happens
we'll make the previous time look like a
picnic
we're way more powerful than we were
you know when we're getting to the point
is something jung talked about
especially near the end of his life
we're getting so powerful that
each individual is now a force of almost
unimaginable destructive power if they
so choose to be
and that's just going to
that power is going to continue to
increase
and what that means is that the degree
to which each of us has our act together
is going to be something
upon which the world increasingly
depends
for its
maintenance
i'm going to add something to why i
think people resonate with you so much
in the book you encourage people to
think from an evolutionary perspective
which i think is incredibly important
and i think what you
offer people is one you make we all
struggle with our own internal demons
and you
allow people to see how that's a heroic
endeavor maybe the ultimate heroic
endeavor to conquer that inside of
yourself and then going back to the
beginning of identity being a function
of behavior
by helping people begin to identify as
the hero engaging in relatively
straightforward behaviors like cleaning
your room or liking the new book making
an area beautiful refusing to give into
resentment aim at one thing which [__]
was one of my favorite parts of the book
and see how extraordinarily good you can
get at that like when i think that's a
good thing is you got to aim at
something
it's like otherwise your life is
meaningless well what should you aim at
well i don't know well pick something
pick something aim at it as you move
toward it you'll get wiser then maybe
your aim will change that's okay but at
least it'll change in an informed way
it's like discipline yourself in one
dimension
see what happens
well that's exciting
and i think that's something that's open
for everyone
you can do that
i shouldn't say that because i don't
believe that i think you can find
yourself in a situation that's so dire
that you don't there's no escape from it
but
that doesn't matter because
this still this is the hero myth might
not
be the best we have might not always
work
but it's still the best we have
and the fact that it might not work
doesn't mean we should throw it away
still the best we have
i mean everyone dies and so we fail in
some sense
the fact that a symphony ends doesn't
mean that it wasn't worth listening to
yeah when you put that in an
evolutionary context and you acknowledge
that people are
compelled by biology to strive they're
compelled by biology to progress they're
compelled by biology to um be courageous
that they will be rewarded for being
courageous neurochemically they will be
punished for being a coward
neurochemically
and
yeah well think about you know the thing
about that biological explanation too is
that we've been social for a very long
time
we've been social for so long that our
social nature is programmed into our
biology
and so
you'll be punished if you're not useful
to other people yes
by your conscience because you're a
social creature
and the question is well how could you
be most
here's another question that starts to
what verge on the religious
what does the most useful person look
like well who is everyone hoping they'll
meet
and that's a genuine question i'm like
and that's the ideal the ideal is the
person everyone's hoping they'll meet
that's christ in in the christian
culture
psychologically speaking
independent of any religious claims
so that's
these these this is this is
i suppose the essential idea of the
archetype from the union perspective we
have the we have the image of an ideal
and because it is the ultimate ideal it
has a religious element it's compelling
it's a judge why is it a judge well if
you fall short of the ideal your
conscience punishes you so it's a judge
and it's merciful well why because if
you act out the ideal
then your life improves
you know what i said well the question
what is the relationship between these
images of the psyche
and
reality
i i don't know the answer to that
i don't know
where
the archetype shades into
reality
it depends to some degree on how you
define reality
and you know this is i've been
people don't like that
statement
but
when you're asking questions that are
deep enough you start to have to ask
what do you mean by true for example
what do you mean by real because the
questions you ask get so deep that
they're of the same kind as the question
what is real or what is true
you know if think of it this way
reality is what we adapt to
by definition
that's reasonable if you're a darwinian
you have to say that's actually as far
as you can go reality is that which
shapes us
you can't get a better handle on reality
than that well
when you make a picture of objective
reality it's not the same as that
it's a different picture
and it's not obvious which one should
play trump
now the hero myth as far as i can tell
is an evolutionary artifact
and that means that for human beings
that the hero image is the path of
of optimal adaptation
does that reflect reality
well it does insofar as reality has
selected that
does that mean that reality is a story
because the hero myth is a story or at
least that's one of the things it is
does it mean that reality has a
narrative aspect
well it does insofar as we act things
out
does that mean that reality is
ultimately a story well i don't know
but the answer isn't obviously no
in rule two you say to imagine who we
could be and then to aim single-mindedly
at that
but reality gets in the way of you
reaching that potential and it can hurt
how can people cope with the pain of
unreached potential
well part of oh that's a really good
question
look every ideal is a judge
right so you pause it an ideal and
instantly you're in inferior position in
relationship to that ideal and that can
be crushing
okay so what do you do about that well
one answer is no ideals well that's not
a good answer because then you don't
have anything to do
right so so and that deprives you of a
main source of pleasure which is
observed uh generated as a consequence
of observed movement towards a valued
goal so if you have a high goal
and you see any movement towards it
there's a potential there's a really
powerful potential kick there so you
don't want to dispense with that but
then if you set up an ideal it can judge
you very harshly
so then you have to rearrange your
reward
philosophy and instead of
punishing yourself from
as a consequence of perceived distance
you reward yourself for incremental
movement forward and that's not just
theoretical look i was stopped by three
guys on the street this week three
separate occasions and they all told me
the same thing they you know they they
said that they had read or something i
wrote or listened to something or
watched
something and that it had been helpful
and whenever ever anybody says that to
me i always ask them okay exactly what
was helpful and what changed because i
want to know what's helping so that i
can understand the target and hit it
better and so and generally people are
are pleased to tell me
um although sometimes it takes them a
while to formulate exactly the
description but they all three of them
said um
i stopped comparing myself to other
people
so i'll stop comparing what i didn't
have to what other people had i left
that off the table and then i started to
reward myself for improving over what i
was
yesterday so they and that's profound
change because it means that you
actually get your reward structure
transformed and that's a big deal
because that's that's your source of
positive emotion
and enthusiasm encouragement all of that
so now you can start to encourage
yourself for for genuine improvement and
it's also pragmatically extremely
intelligent because
incremental improvement repeated is
virtually unstoppable
and i
that's like the hallmark of behavioral
therapy that idea because what a
behavior therapist does is you come and
you say to me
i'm not things aren't the way i want
them to be and then i say well well
how would you like them to be and how
are they not that so we lay out the
problem the territory and then the next
thing we do is lay out a trajectory
which is okay well here's something
you're lonesome
you don't have a partner okay so
what are the what are incremental
movements can you make towards that goal
that you would do
that would be helpful
and so maybe you
you you negotiate with the person
because that's what you do if you're a
reasonable therapist and you say well
look why don't you uh
you decide as a consequence of the
conversation
why don't you write out a description of
yourself for a dating site don't post it
or anything
just write it out
and and then let's see if you actually
do that
and so then the person comes back next
week and they say i did that and not
only that i posted it and you say great
what's the next step or they say geez
you know i just kept avoiding that
and then you say okay well
we need to break that down
you avoided it well could you write one
sentence about who you are right now
while you're sitting here
and sometimes they can do that right
away or sometimes they can't and then
you you make a microanalysis of that and
what you do is you
you reduce
the magnitude of the move forward
until you hit the point where you
actually will do it
and that's like the secret to good
negotiation as well if you're
negotiating with your wife maybe you
want one of her behaviors to change
and
then
obviously she has to be on board with
that and hypothetically that's going to
be reciprocal process
but what you want to do is find a small
improvement
that is measurable
that's implementable that will be
implemented that you can then reward
and and that's that's that's how you can
have your ideal
you you can have whatever ideal you want
as long as you're willing
to reduce your movement forward to
achievable increments but that's okay
because
they compound
so and i really learned this as a
therapist it was one of the things that
was so fun about being a therapist is
you can take someone through this
process and start them on just the
tiniest goal
you know and it just seems trivial
but they'll do it and then they start
moving fast aft faster and faster after
that point once the direction has been
established and people make incredible
improvement over you know uh not
unreasonable spans of time
a few months maybe a few years but which
is not nothing but it's not decades you
know it's
i saw that time and time again
so
aim high but
reward yourself for small incremental
improvements especially ones that repeat
every day
imagine who you could be and then aim
single-mindedly at that that was a
tricky one to have you do because
the chapter is an analysis of an old
alchemical drawing
and so you had to be constrained in in
the recreation of that because it had to
duplicate all the elements of the
original drawing or my chapter wouldn't
have made any sense
so
which made it easier for me being
constrained is easy
i know exactly what's supposed to be
there
yes well people with an artistic
temperament or maybe people with a
wannabe artistic temperament often rail
against constraint but
it's
you want a lot of constraint generally
speaking otherwise you drown in choice
and that's that's a big problem so this
chapter describes this picture
as a story that proceeds from the bottom
up you can take it in at a glance but it
also proceeds from the bottom up
and it's the emergence of personality
well-developed personality from
from nothing in some sense or from
potential that's another way of thinking
about it
and it's an unbelievably sophisticated
image and which is why it takes me a
chapter to
unwrap some of it
so um
what what
what did you
what was the experience for you of
working on this image
i figured i was looking for one of the
paintings to make inverted
as opposed to
black figures on white background which
is usually the case
i've done it inverted and i loved it i
loved how it's black
as opposed to every original i saw
on the internet
that makes it very
magical
uh the dragon there
so the way the picture works just as a
hint is that
well
the bottom sphere in some sense
represents that which attracts your
interest and
then that can transform itself into that
which you're afraid of so you might have
an ambition for example to pursue
something you're interested in but then
that turns into a dragon because you're
afraid of pursuing it but if you do
confront it then that turns into you
that that helps you develop your
personality that's
that's that image in a thumbnail um
it's
much more to it than that of course
i love it